Author: Brett Estrade <oodler@cpan.org>
Title: Perl+OpenMP Used to Save Christmas 
Topic: Ref::Util

=pod

=encoding utf8

It was Christmas Eve, and Santa was facing a nightmare. The sleigh’s new
GPS system, upgraded for the first time in centuries, was malfunctioning. As
Santa checked the screen, the map was a chaotic mess—locations were wrong,
some coordinates didn’t make sense, and the sleigh was heading straight
into the mountains instead of over the city.

Santa's current position readout indicated the following:

  Sleigh Latitude  Sleigh Longitude  Sleigh Altitude (ft)
           40.712           -74.006              300

"We can't afford this!" Santa shouted. "We’ve got billions of presents to
deliver, and the system's down!"

"Santa, we can fix it," Jingles, the lead elf, said with a frantic smile. "We
just need more computing power. If we use OpenMP, we can parallelize the
calculations and solve this quickly."

Santa stared. “What are you talking about, Jingles? I'm a giant elf, not an engineer from Scotland!”

“We’ll solve the GPS problem by recalculating the distances to each
delivery location. The sleigh’s GPS relies on triangulating data from
multiple satellites. Right now, it's too slow to process the data for each
location one by one. We can use OpenMP to divide the problem into smaller
parts, calculate distances in parallel, and get this fixed fast.”

The distance formula was computationally expensive, involving square roots
and trigonometry. But by using OpenMP, the task could be split into multiple
threads, each calculating the distance to one satellite at the same time. The
results would then be aggregated, and the sleigh would know exactly where
to go.

  // Function to calculate Euclidean distance between two points (x1, y1, z1) and (x2, y2, z2)
  double calculate_distance(double x1, double y1, double z1, double x2, double y2, double z2) {
      return sqrt(pow(x2 - x1, 2) + pow(y2 - y1, 2) + pow(z2 - z1, 2));
  }

He would parallize the work by dividing the list of satellites among a number
of I<pthreads> using OpenMP's C<#pragma omp for> construct!

  #pragma omp parallel shared(_distances)
  {
      // Parallel for loop to compute distances in parallel
      #pragma omp for
      for (int i = 0; i < satellite_count; i++) {
          _distances[i] = 0.0;  // Initialize

          double sat_x, sat_y, sat_z;

          // Convert satellite's geographic coordinates to Cartesian coordinates
          geo_to_cartesian(sat_latitudes[i], sat_longitudes[i], sat_altitudes[i], &sat_x, &sat_y, &sat_z);

          // Calculate the distance from the sleigh to this satellite
          _distances[i] = calculate_distance(sleigh_x, sleigh_y, sleigh_z, sat_x, sat_y, sat_z);
      }
  }

Jingles quickly typed up a solution in Perl of all things. The solution was
simple but critically offloaded the triangulation computations to C<Inline::C>
code containing OpenMP directives, using the C<OpenMP> on CPAN: for each
delivery, the system needed to calculate the distance from the sleigh to
each of the 20 nearest satellites.

  use strict;
  use warnings;
  
  use OpenMP;
     
  use Inline (
      C    => 'DATA',
      with => qw/OpenMP::Simple/,
  );
     
  my $omp = OpenMP->new;
  
  # accept number of threads via commandline
  $omp->env->omp_num_threads($ARGV[0] // 8);
  
  # Earth radius in meters
  my $R = 6371000;
  
  # Sleigh's position (latitude, longitude, altitude)
  my $sleigh_lat = 40.7128;
  my $sleigh_lon = -74.0060;
  my $sleigh_alt = 300.0; # in meters
  
  # Satellite positions in tab-delimited format
  my @satellites = ();
  open my $FH, "<", "./satellite-data.txt" || die $!;
  
  foreach my $line (<$FH>) {
    chomp $line;
    push @satellites, [split(/[\s\t]+/, $line)];
  }
  
  # Function to calculate distance from sleigh to each satellite using Inline::C
  my $distances = calculate_distances($sleigh_lat, $sleigh_lon, $sleigh_alt, \@satellites);
  
  # Print the calculated distances
  foreach my $distance (@$distances) {
      print "Distance: $distance meters\n";
  }
  
Santa watched as Jingles split the task. Each satellite’s data was handled
in parallel by different threads, and within seconds, the recalculations
were done. The GPS was fixed.

Just as the final calculation finished, a gentle voice spoke, “With Faith
and sanctified technology, all things are possible.”

Santa turned to see Baby Jesus in the arms of His Virgin Mother by the sleigh,
smiling serenely.  “Thank you,” Santa whispered. “Merry Christmas.”

With the sleigh back on track, Santa soared into the night sky.

When things settled down, Santa was able to look at Jingles' full code, and it
was something to behold:

  use strict;
  use warnings;
  
  use OpenMP;
     
  use Inline (
      C    => 'DATA',
      with => qw/OpenMP::Simple/,
  );
     
  my $omp = OpenMP->new;
  
  $omp->env->omp_num_threads($ARGV[0] // 8); # accept number of threads via commandline
  
  # Earth radius in meters
  my $R = 6371000;
  
  # Sleigh's position (latitude, longitude, altitude)
  my $sleigh_lat = 40.7128;
  my $sleigh_lon = -74.0060;
  my $sleigh_alt = 300.0; # in meters
  
  # Satellite positions in tab-delimited format
  my @satellites = ();
  open my $FH, "<", "./satellite-data.txt" || die $!;
  
  foreach my $line (<$FH>) {
    chomp $line;
    push @satellites, [split(/[\s\t]+/, $line)];
  }
  
  # Function to calculate distance from sleigh to each satellite using Inline::C
  my $distances = calculate_distances($sleigh_lat, $sleigh_lon, $sleigh_alt, \@satellites);
  
  # Print the calculated distances
  foreach my $distance (@$distances) {
      print "Distance: $distance meters\n";
  }
  
  __DATA__
  __C__
  
  #include <math.h>
   
  // Function to convert geographic coordinates to Cartesian (x, y, z)
  void geo_to_cartesian(double lat, double lon, double alt, double *x, double *y, double *z) {
      double R = 6371000;  // Earth's radius in meters
      double lat_rad = lat * M_PI / 180.0;
      double lon_rad = lon * M_PI / 180.0;
  
      *x = (R + alt) * cos(lat_rad) * cos(lon_rad);
      *y = (R + alt) * cos(lat_rad) * sin(lon_rad);
      *z = (R + alt) * sin(lat_rad);
  }
  
  // Function to calculate Euclidean distance between two points (x1, y1, z1) and (x2, y2, z2)
  double calculate_distance(double x1, double y1, double z1, double x2, double y2, double z2) {
      return sqrt(pow(x2 - x1, 2) + pow(y2 - y1, 2) + pow(z2 - z1, 2));
  }
  
  /* C function parallelized with OpenMP */
  // Main function to calculate the distances from the sleigh to each satellite
  AV* calculate_distances(double sleigh_lat, double sleigh_lon, double sleigh_alt, AV *satellites) {
      int satellite_count = av_len(satellites) + 1;  // The number of satellites
      AV* distances = newAV();  // Create a new Perl array (AV) to hold the distances
  
      double sleigh_x, sleigh_y, sleigh_z;
  
      // Convert sleigh's geographic coordinates to Cartesian coordinates
      geo_to_cartesian(sleigh_lat, sleigh_lon, sleigh_alt, &sleigh_x, &sleigh_y, &sleigh_z);
  
      // Fetch satellite data into local arrays
      double *sat_latitudes = malloc(satellite_count * sizeof(double));
      double *sat_longitudes = malloc(satellite_count * sizeof(double));
      double *sat_altitudes = malloc(satellite_count * sizeof(double));
  
      // Populate satellite data into local arrays (from the Perl array)
      for (int i = 0; i < satellite_count; i++) {
          AV *satellite = (AV*) SvRV(*av_fetch(satellites, i, 0));  // Fetch the satellite at index i
          sat_latitudes[i] = ((double) SvNV(*av_fetch(satellite, 0, 0)));  // Latitude
          sat_longitudes[i] = ((double) SvNV(*av_fetch(satellite, 1, 0)));  // Longitude
          sat_altitudes[i] = ((double) SvNV(*av_fetch(satellite, 2, 0)));  // Altitude
      }
  
      // Declare a temporary array to hold distances for each thread
      double *_distances = malloc(satellite_count * sizeof(double));
  
      PerlOMP_GETENV_BASIC // read common environmental variables, e.g., OMP_GET_NUM_THREADS
  
      // Start parallel region
      #pragma omp parallel shared(_distances)
      {
          // Parallel for loop to compute distances in parallel
          #pragma omp for
          for (int i = 0; i < satellite_count; i++) {
              _distances[i] = 0.0;  // Initialize
  
              double sat_x, sat_y, sat_z;
  
              // Convert satellite's geographic coordinates to Cartesian coordinates
              geo_to_cartesian(sat_latitudes[i], sat_longitudes[i], sat_altitudes[i], &sat_x, &sat_y, &sat_z);
  
              // Calculate the distance from the sleigh to this satellite
              _distances[i] = calculate_distance(sleigh_x, sleigh_y, sleigh_z, sat_x, sat_y, sat_z);
          }
      }
  
      // Combine the results from all threads into the main distances array inside the parallel region
      for (int i = 0; i < satellite_count; i++) {
          av_push(distances, newSVnv(_distances[i]));
      }
  
      // Free the private distance arrays and satellite data arrays
      free(_distances);
      free(sat_latitudes);
      free(sat_longitudes);
      free(sat_altitudes);
  
      // Return the AV containing the distances to Perl
      return distances;
  }
  
  __END__

=cut
